Well, the Joe Rogan experience, but what we are now doing,
and the thing that troubles me most about this movement is that if you listen to
it closely and I have listened to it very closely,
it is explicitly about disassembling,
the very things that make the west marvelous, right?
It is anti science, right? It does not want policy based on science. In fact,
well, I mean, you saw last week,
presumably that it got a nature,
the journal nature or science magazine, uh, Cal tech, it got all of these,
uh,
just absolutely top level scientific institutions to broadcast
the hashtag shut down stem. What? Oh yeah,
no, I'm not aware of this at all. Oh, well,
and this is another thing we're losing our minds because to me,
the idea that you would be unaware of this is hard to imagine because it was so
much going on. It was so thoroughly all over my feed though,
but I'm discovering this there's stuff absent from my feed too,
that I should know about. And I'm finding the same thing.
But here's the thing. I don't read my feed.
Well, you don't read your Twitter feed, but you're plugged into enough people.
You have to have conversations, right.
Things have to be like almost nuclear before I'm paying attention to them these
days, just for my own personal sanity. Yeah. I,
I I've stepped away from almost all social media other than.
Yeah. It's actually, uh, uh, if I can say something perfectly weird,
I don't really aspire to great wealth. I never have,
but there is part of me that wants to be wealthy enough that I can afford to
ignore my feeds. Right. I can't now I have to be plugged in. But,
um, but anyway, the, uh, the thing that's really concerning here, and I,
you know, I, I don't want this podcast to be all about concern.
Thousands of scientists go on strike to protest,
systemic racism and stem more than 5,000 scientists in two prominent
scientific journals,
shut down operations and pledged to use the data to address racial inequalities
in science,
the strike falls two weeks of demonstration spurred by the police killing of
George Floyd, a black man who died after a white police officer pro um,
people on social media or spreading word about the strike with the hashtag shut
down academia,
shut down stem and strike for black lives.
Shut down. Academia's terrifying. Shut down. Stem is equally terrifying,
but I'm to like, what takes its place? What do you expect? Well,
if you shut down academia, like what do they, what are they saying?
When they say systemic racism in stem? What does it mean?
It's representation in terms of like the, what are they saying?
So this is so sad because truly,
if you, if you really wanted to, uh,
to raise black people out of the quagmire, the economic quagmire,
they find themselves in. If you want it to do it on mass,
you would arm them with the most powerful tools, right?
The powerful tool and the tool that is best positioned to
address biases, especially subtle biases is science. That's,
that's what the scientific method does.
That's it's one reason for existing is that it takes that, which you think,
and allows you to see why it is wrong, right?
It takes your biases and forces you to see what's wrong with them.
That's what science is for now.
The reason that this movement is attacking stem has to do with the connection of
this movement to critical theory and critical theory.
Didn't come from the science. As the word theory is basically, uh,
pilfered, right? It's being used in a most ironic fashion.
Critical theory is a narrative.
That's now becoming a religious movement and it is anti stem on the basis that
it claims that stem itself science itself is racist
inherently. What.
Do they mean when they, when they're saying critical theory? Yeah.
What does that encompass?
Well,
my understanding is that critical theory was born as an honorable investigation
of biases that exist inside of our court system, racial biases,
and that it has now morphed into something that its originators don't recognize
and don't respect that it has become basically. I mean, you know, you've,
you've had, uh, Jordan Peterson on your podcast many times once with me and,
you know, he, what he talks about with respect to these,
these are cultural Marxists and they are wielding this post-modern doctrine.
What he's talking about is critical theory, right?
Critical theory is basically a, um,
a Trojan horse that exists in academic departments that are dedicated to its
study. And what it does is it uninvent progress in other fields.
And that's a very, um,
uninteresting process when it's hiding away in some corner of your university
where you don't have to listen to it.
But what has happened is it has now reached enough people that it has spilled
out into public. And the nonsense that you hear about shutting down academia,
shutting down, stem, abolishing, the police,
all of this is standard fare in those phony.
When you say uninvented progress now, what do you mean by that? Well.
I mean that we have a system and, you know,
I'm as upset about what doesn't work about it as anybody,
but we have a system that accomplishes a great deal.
And this style of thought that all of these
departments that end in theory, um,
that don't actually function by normal rules of logic or the
scientific process. These things are an attack.
They're like an auto-immune disease of the academic culture.
And by and large,
the scientific part of the academy keeps his head down and it stays away from
people who believe in this stuff and it tries to do its work. Um,
but what has happened is that the dynamics,
the demographics changed such that these departments,
which weren't taken seriously by the sciences are now dictating terms to the
sciences, which couldn't possibly be more dangerous because to the extent that,
uh, the,
the argument more or less is that the sciences are unfairly biased in
favor of those who are currently successful. And that,
that bias is actually preventing people who are not succeeding under current
conditions from getting there.
And therefore we need to hobble these disciplines to level the playing
field. Well,
imagine that America surrendered its advantage in the
sciences in order to, um,
even if you could level the playing field inside of the U S by doing that,
which you can't, but even if you could,
this would so hobble us in the world that it would be an insane policy to
pursue. Is.
There any debate going on about this? Clearly,
what they're saying is if you're looking at the vast majority of the scientists
they represent, what, what is it?
European Jews are a lot of them.
There's a lot of various people of European ancestry,
Asian folks, less, African-Americans less Africans.
So they're saying that because of this, this is clear,
this is clear evidence of racism.
Yeah. Which is total nonsense. What is it? Evidence of it is? Well,
it's evidence of a number of things. And, you know,
I find myself in two places on a lot of these arguments on the one hand,
somehow I'm sitting here on your podcast,
defending academia went on any normal day.
I would be telling you academia was so incredibly broken.
And science has been so incredibly,
incredibly corrupted by its contact with the market that we have to fix these
things, because that is in and of itself a threat, you know, to the west here,
I find myself saying, wait a second.
These people are actually telling you what they think.
They think science is the enemy.
And instead of democratizing the tools of science and giving them to the people
who need the most, they want to end science.
So the problems are several.
Unfortunately they're not tremendously interesting.
They're sort of dry inside baseball stuff.
I think we have to cover them though,
just to sort of take the legs out from under this racism argument when it comes
to representation.
Sure. So first of all,
let me just say academia is tremendously
liberal and that, uh, I mean that in both senses,
let's take the honorable part of it right inside of a university.
There is every desire to bring people who do not look
like the old white guys that have done so much of the past work in science.
There is a desire to, uh, to broaden, you know,
so it is not true that privately scientists are harboring racist
views and talking about them. And then, you know,
behaving themselves when they're around people who are of a different color.
It's not like that. Okay. There is a desire to have those people show up, uh,
and get the job because for one thing,
it takes the pressure off to the extent that departments don't look like the
demographics of the country, in which these departments are housed, you know,
that raises questions. And so there's a desire to bring in anybody who, um,
makes it clear that that's not going on. However, let's say that you were,
uh, you were black and you grew up in a neighborhood where the odds were stacked
against you and you made it, let's say that, um, you know, you,
you had people who, uh,
said wise things to you and they got you to focus on the right stuff.
And you managed to Dodge the stuff that captures so many and you made it right.
Let's say you got into Harvard, you got to a really good quality degree in, uh,
in, uh, in a proper science, well, what are you going to do with it?
You're going to go into academia.
That would be insane because I don't know what the numbers are.
I don't know what fraction of people who get PhDs actually get the job that
they've trained for, but it's tiny. It wasn't really, I'll be like one in 20,
really? Yeah.
Because there's only so many positions and every year you're graduating
hundreds and hundreds of people with those degrees. Well,
but there's also a very.
Good reason for this. I mean, it's a terrible reason,
but there's a very easily comprehended reason.
So universities are fueled in large measure by what's called overhead of the
grants. So if you've got a million dollar grant,
half or more will go to your university, right?
So that's what builds the buildings and fuels to place.
So the university has an incentive to get as many people file grant applications
as they can.
And they have an incentive to hire people whose grant applications will be large
rather than small.
So this for example is one of the reasons that science has taken up arms against
theory, that is to say proper scientific theoreticians like me.
And it is instead hired people who run big,
expensive experiments because big expensive experiments have big grants.
And those big grants bring in money.
But if you were a university and what you wanted was to
have people writing big, expensive grants who were capable of getting them,
then what you would want to do is you would want to free those people from
teaching.
And you would want to get people who weren't so expensive to do the work of the
university.
And the way you do that is you bring them on as graduate students and you pay
them, uh, an appalling wage.
You claim you claim that they are not actually workers, that they are students.
And they, they do most of the teaching.
And they do a lot of the work of the university for incredibly, uh,
low amounts of money. And they live under poor conditions. And increasingly, uh,
they have to come from abroad where they are in some sense, getting a deal.
That still makes sense. But this means that we overproduce PhDs.
We give people degrees instead of money to do the work of the university in
order that the people who are capable of getting the grant spend almost
full-time doing that job. And it's a wreck. So in.
That, so I wasn't aware of that at all. I didn't know how it works.
Yeah.
It's a racket and the person you should talk to the person who knows the most
about this is actually Eric, my brother. Um,
so what he on earth was actually that there was an explicit
conspiracy to game the visa system in order to keep the
system running. Then in fact,
effectively a fake shortage of science students was created
to allow the universities to basically flood the market,
to drive the wages down.
But all of these things mean that if you are coming from
circumstances that have, uh,
been challenging and you make it,
you don't want to go to graduate school in the sciences because it's a dumb move
you're going to take having gotten your head above water,
and then you're going to voluntarily drown. And it doesn't make any sense.
You're much better off, even as bad as, you know, being a doctor has become,
it used to be a great job. Now it's kind of a sucky job,
but you're better off doing that because at least it's a job you'll pay off your
loans, you know, you'll make it.
And so basically what we see is that there are lots of reasons that a rational
person, uh, from certain demographics is less likely to go into the sciences.
That's not racism in the sciences. It's again,
one of these echoes of a past, uh,
racism or a past indifference that is having huge impacts on the present.
Okay. Um,
so these people that want to
that, that think that stem is racist and they want to dismantle it.
What do they propose? Like what,
what do they propose them replacement of stem and academia.
So I,
what they want is so strange and preposterous that it damages my
credibility to even say it. I, I will, I will answer your question,
but I know that what I'm saying sounds preposterous.
The only reason that I'm so certain of it is that I've talked to them directly.
And I watched this happen at every grade. I.
Talk to them Greg directly. So, you know, this is actually what they want.
I can't say they.
Because undoubtedly there's variations, but I can say that.
To the extent that I've actually had these conversations with people,
I was left completely shocked by, you know,
there was an, there was an example at evergreen where, uh,
we were in a faculty meeting and I said
that the proposals that we're moving through were a threat to the
enlightenment values that were the basis of the institution.
And what I got back was something I had never heard before, which was an attack,
not only on the enlightenment, but on the idea of enlightenment.
I was just so stunned. I was a college professor amongst faculty,
and somebody was actually saying out loud that enlightenment was a problem.
And nobody in the room said.
What did they mean by enlightenment as a problem? So.
Here's, here's what I say to,
to people who asked me about this students in particular, um,
the enlightenment was a European
project, right? It definitely had a light skin tone,
right? It was, it was European men. It was not a Jewish project,
but I am not embarrassed about taking the tools of the enlightenment and
wielding. They don't belong to Europe, right? They're human they're human tools.
They were a discovery in Europe.
And arguably the discovery in Europe happened because of unfair exclusion of
other people. But at some level who the cares,
these are the most powerful tools ever. And you can't,
uninvent them. The thing to do is distribute them as broadly as possible.
But if you're in critical theory, first of all,
if you end up in critical theory, any one of these fields, women's studies,
studies, whatever it is,
you have all ready for gone. This option.
You don't end up in critical theory if you have the chops to do science.
So in effect you have people who don't stand to
personally benefit from opening those doors wider because they wouldn't go
through them arguing that nobody should go through those doors.
So let's take a side step here. Um, critical theory,
when you're talking about gender studies or studies,
why do you think those are not valid avenues
for, for people to pursue well?
Because the method is nonexistent.
If you were to do these things properly,
you would study them with the tools of stem, right?
But we know from, we know that's not what goes on inside of these departments.
And we also know that the product doesn't add up from the point of view of
science, you can't take the claim for example, that, uh,
uh, if a man decides that he is a woman than he is a woman,
it's not a valid claim, it just doesn't stand up.
And you can't claim that sexist spectrum eater, that claim doesn't stand up.
These are empty.
And we could have a discussion about what we are to do in light of the
part of gender that is flexible,
but we're not having that conversation because we've got an ultimatum on the
table. Either you agree sex is a spectrum or you're the enemy, right?
So all I would say is just empirically. This is what happens. Now.
I will also say, uh,
one of the most telling incidents that happened during the evergreen riots
is now finally, it's been covered by PBS.
I've talked about it on my podcast, a student of Heather and mine,
um, an excellent student,
one of the best ones ever had as a young woman named Odette.
Odette is half black. Her mom is Africa, Caribbean.
She was known to be my student and Heather student during the riots.
And she was actually confronted and physically bullied by the
rioters who accused her,
of being a race trader for studying science. This actually happened.
And what I'm telling you.
When they say you're a race trader for studying science, what what's,
what specific discipline?
Well, she was studying evolutionary biology with Heather and me and,
and.
They said, yes, you are race trader for studying evolutionary biology because.
Because science is racist, yo
it's nonsense. And I hear you trying to parse it as if it makes sense.
And I think.
The point is stand as a person who spent three years barely paying attention in
college. I don't know how it got to that.
I don't know how that becomes an actual course.
I don't know how that gets funded.
I don't know how that you can get a degree from that. Well.
So what I've heard of late, um, and I'm, it may be James Lindsay,
who is the originator of, of this phrasiology,
but there's a term racism of the gaps and racism of the gaps is a
reference to the God of the gaps. Hypothesis.
Anything we can't explain in science is explained by God,
which is obviously nonsense,
but racism of the gap says any place where that we see a
success differential, the explanation is inherently racism.
So if we see an absence of black people in math,
obviously the answer is racism.
They apply that in areas where black people Excel.
No, because this is a self-serving, uh, modality, like hip hop,
right? And so let's go back to Odette for a second,
trying to parse what they're saying as if it has content logical content is a
mistake,
trying to parse it as a tactical move makes a lot of sense. Okay.
Let's imagine that Odette was not the courageous person that she is and that she
had caved, right? Imagine you're cornered, you know, you're alone,
you've got a mob that's actually physically confronting you for studying
science. If she was not a person of strong character,
she might have signed up with them. If she had signed up with them,
then a, now they have a potentially powerful ally,
right? A black person, former student of, or at that point, I guess,
current student of Heather and mine, who would say yes, in fact,
science is racist, evolutionary biology, particularly. So I was in that class,
yada, yada, yada.
And people are easily influenced.
And that many bullied by that would probably cause a lot of people to cave
into that. And given to that, just for conformity, just so that people accept.
Them. Yes.
And so thank goodness that Odette is somebody who is of incredibly strong
character, who really got the message of evolutionary biology very deeply.
And there is nothing that they could have said or threatened her with.
It would have caused her to make the move that they wanted her to make,
but processing it, tactically is important.
What they're doing is tactical and what they did with shutdown, stem,
tactical, they were proving their power, right.
They were able to get the most important scientific institutions to broadcast a
demand to shut down stem. That's an amazing level of power.
And actual scientists that are in disciplines
that are legit, like evolutionary biology went along well.
You know,
I contacted Richard Dawkins as this was happening because I didn't see anything
on his feed that suggested, you know, he hadn't made a statement.
I thought it would be powerful him to do for him to do it.
He was totally unaware. It was going on. Right.
So you have the most important institutions broadcasting. This thing,
something about our environment is not calling it to the attention of people who
might be in a position to say something.
And the whole thing is, uh, it's setting us up. We're in,
we're in tremendous danger.
And what, what do you think their motivation is?
Power, power. Well, what happens if that gets.
Through, they shut down stem, then what do they do? How did you know, did they,
are they thinking this far ahead? They're not playing this long game.
Um, okay. I would just,
I would tell people who aren't aware of me and what I think and believe that
I am very progressive.
I am very interested in making a fair system that some, I,
I, I know you, I know you are.
So what I'm about to say sounds like one of those right-wing crazy things,
what they want. Well, imagine the following look, first of all,
let's talk about reparations for a second. Okay. Okay.
I am not a fan of the idea of reparations.
I think it would be a terrible failure. It would be a disaster,
but I do believe that something of very substantial
magnitude is justified. I just don't think reparations is the answer.
I completely agree. Okay. I think reform in terms of communities, I think, uh,
spending massive amounts of money to rebuild communities and give people hope.
Yes. Economic opportunities. It's massive.
Investment in communities that have been systematically frozen out.
And I would put, uh,
I would put American blacks and American Indians at the top of the list because
I believe they have a special claim. It's.
Particularly native Americans are particularly distraught because they've been
subjugated to this weird position when they're stuck on these reservations.
So, so, uh, we'll come back to this for a second maybe, but, um,
I think that there's something very special that happened with blacks and with
Indians. And they're not, it's not exactly alike,
but it has to do with their different origin stories that these two populations,
uh, I have, um, both suffered a parallel. Uh,
I don't even know what to call it. An obstacle that doesn't,
that makes them unlike, um, anyone other Americans. Yes.
So not in favor of reparations,
but I would be in favor of something that did the job that reparations are
imagined to do. Okay.
What this movement is,
is an attempt to create a slant
in every single interaction that does the job of reparations.
It's reparations 24 hours a day,
seven days a week in every room in every institution,
in every context right now that
will be the uninvented of America. It is in some weird sense,
a mirror for the America that blacks and Indians have
faced. They have faced an America in which everything was slanted against them.
It has grown less. So, but again,
we have the echoes of that deeply slanted America that are
broadcast into the present at a high level of intensity. Um,
but you cannot do reparations
inside of every institution every hour,
every discussion that is not a plausible plan,
even people who support the idea of monetary reparations of the solution,
if they understood the dynamics of trying to infuse it into every interaction,
there is no way it could possibly work.
And it invalidates all of the most important principles on which America runs.
So we are really talking about uninvented America and substituting a reparations
program for it,
which it just couldn't possibly be a bigger hazard and think,
think for a second, if you're trying to imagine what the hell I'm talking about.
Imagine right now,
there is a problem. There's a process called jury nullification.
And Eric has pointed out that jury nullification is a huge hazard in an era
where people are saying as much nonsense about who's guilty and who's innocent
and what it has to do with race as we have,
because effectively you can instantly create a situation in which
the law doesn't apply to certain folks because of the color of their skin,
right? That would be an advantage.
You could argue that it was compensatory for years of being on the other end of
that deal, but it cannot be made to function.
But the other thing is also possible, right? You can, uh,
not only have the law not apply to people on the basis that they have a skin
color that suggests they've had a raw deal,
but you can also make the law apply to people because of their skin color.
We can have show trials, right?
I was effectively exposed to the equivalent of a short trial at evergreen,
right. I was convicted of racism and it happened at for various reasons.
I knew well that the charge was completely empty based on my history as a
human being. And so I felt I could stand up to it and withstand it.
And I guess in a way I did, on the other hand,
my wife and I were driven out of the college. So yes, I survived it, but,
um, I didn't survive at intact. Right. I made it somewhere else,
but that show trial mentality mean it would be a perfect fit
for the, uh, the Maoist part of this,
of this movements, ethos. I mean, we're already seeing struggle sessions,
people being forced to admit things that aren't true, right.